<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-6" id="chapter-6-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
			<p>Despite himself Jude recovered somewhat, and worked at his trade for several weeks. After Christmas, however, he broke down again.</p>
			<p>With the money he had earned he shifted his lodgings to a yet more central part of the town. But Arabella saw that he was not likely to do much work for a long while, and was cross enough at the turn affairs had taken since her remarriage to him. ‚ÄúI‚Äôm hanged if you haven‚Äôt been clever in this last stroke!‚Äù she would say, ‚Äúto get a nurse for nothing by marrying me!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Jude was absolutely indifferent to what she said, and, indeed, often regarded her abuse in a humorous light. Sometimes his mood was more earnest, and as he lay he often rambled on upon the defeat of his early aims.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúEvery man has some little power in some one direction,‚Äù he would say. ‚ÄúI was never really stout enough for the stone trade, particularly the fixing. Moving the blocks always used to strain me, and standing the trying draughts in buildings before the windows are in, always gave me colds, and I think that began the mischief inside. But I felt I could do one thing if I had the opportunity. I could accumulate ideas, and impart them to others. I wonder if the Founders had such as I in their minds‚ÅÝ‚Äîa fellow good for nothing else but that particular thing?‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I hear that soon there is going to be a better chance for such helpless students as I was. There are schemes afoot for making the University less exclusive, and extending its influence. I don‚Äôt know much about it. And it is too late, too late for me! Ah‚ÅÝ‚Äîand for how many worthier ones before me!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHow you keep a-mumbling!‚Äù said Arabella. ‚ÄúI should have thought you‚Äôd have got over all that craze about books by this time. And so you would, if you‚Äôd had any sense to begin with. You are as bad now as when we were first married.‚Äù</p>
			<p>On one occasion while soliloquizing thus he called her ‚ÄúSue‚Äù unconsciously.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI wish you‚Äôd mind who you are talking to!‚Äù said Arabella indignantly. ‚ÄúCalling a respectable married woman by the name of that‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù She remembered herself and he did not catch the word.</p>
			<p>But in the course of time, when she saw how things were going, and how very little she had to fear from Sue‚Äôs rivalry, she had a fit of generosity. ‚ÄúI suppose you want to see your‚ÅÝ‚ÄîSue?‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúWell, I don‚Äôt mind her coming. You can have her here if you like.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt wish to see her again.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúO‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs a change!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd don‚Äôt tell her anything about me‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat I‚Äôm ill, or anything. She has chosen her course. Let her go!‚Äù</p>
			<p>One day he received a surprise. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝEdlin came to see him, quite on her own account. Jude‚Äôs wife, whose feelings as to where his affections were centred had reached absolute indifference by this time, went out, leaving the old woman alone with Jude. He impulsively asked how Sue was, and then said bluntly, remembering what Sue had told him: ‚ÄúI suppose they are still only husband and wife in name?‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝEdlin hesitated. ‚ÄúWell, no‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs different now. She‚Äôs begun it quite lately‚ÅÝ‚Äîall of her own free will.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhen did she begin?‚Äù he asked quickly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe night after you came. But as a punishment to her poor self. He didn‚Äôt wish it, but she insisted.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSue, my Sue‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou darling fool‚ÅÝ‚Äîthis is almost more than I can endure!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝEdlin‚ÅÝ‚Äîdon‚Äôt be frightened at my rambling‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôve got to talk to myself lying here so many hours alone‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe was once a woman whose intellect was to mine like a star to a benzoline lamp: who saw all <em>my</em> superstitions as cobwebs that she could brush away with a word. Then bitter affliction came to us, and her intellect broke, and she veered round to darkness. Strange difference of sex, that time and circumstance, which enlarge the views of most men, narrow the views of women almost invariably. And now the ultimate horror has come‚ÅÝ‚Äîher giving herself like this to what she loathes, in her enslavement to forms!‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe, so sensitive, so shrinking, that the very wind seemed to blow on her with a touch of deference.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ As for Sue and me when we were at our own best, long ago‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhen our minds were clear, and our love of truth fearless‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe time was not ripe for us! Our ideas were fifty years too soon to be any good to us. And so the resistance they met with brought reaction in her, and recklessness and ruin on me!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ There‚ÅÝ‚Äîthis, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝEdlin, is how I go on to myself continually, as I lie here. I must be boring you awfully.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot at all, my dear boy. I could hearken to ‚Äôee all day.‚Äù</p>
			<p>As Jude reflected more and more on her news, and grew more restless, he began in his mental agony to use terribly profane language about social conventions, which started a fit of coughing. Presently there came a knock at the door downstairs. As nobody answered it <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝEdlin herself went down.</p>
			<p>The visitor said blandly: ‚ÄúThe doctor.‚Äù The lanky form was that of Physician Vilbert, who had been called in by Arabella.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHow is my patient at present?‚Äù asked the physician.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúO bad‚ÅÝ‚Äîvery bad! Poor chap, he got excited, and do blaspeam terribly, since I let out some gossip by accident‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe more to my blame. But there‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou must excuse a man in suffering for what he says, and I hope God will forgive him.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAh. I‚Äôll go up and see him. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝFawley at home?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe‚Äôs not in at present, but she‚Äôll be here soon.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Vilbert went; but though Jude had hitherto taken the medicines of that skilful practitioner with the greatest indifference whenever poured down his throat by Arabella, he was now so brought to bay by events that he vented his opinion of Vilbert in the physician‚Äôs face, and so forcibly, and with such striking epithets, that Vilbert soon scurried downstairs again. At the door he met Arabella, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝEdlin having left. Arabella inquired how he thought her husband was now, and seeing that the doctor looked ruffled, asked him to take something. He assented.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôll bring it to you here in the passage,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúThere‚Äôs nobody but me about the house today.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She brought him a bottle and a glass, and he drank. Arabella began shaking with suppressed laughter. ‚ÄúWhat is this, my dear?‚Äù he asked, smacking his lips.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúO‚ÅÝ‚Äîa drop of wine‚ÅÝ‚Äîand something in it.‚Äù Laughing again she said: ‚ÄúI poured your own love-philtre into it, that you sold me at the Agricultural Show, don‚Äôt you remember?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI do, I do! Clever woman! But you must be prepared for the consequences.‚Äù Putting his arm round her shoulders he kissed her there and then.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt, don‚Äôt,‚Äù she whispered, laughing good-humouredly. ‚ÄúMy man will hear.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She let him out of the house, and as she went back she said to herself: ‚ÄúWell! Weak women must provide for a rainy day. And if my poor fellow upstairs do go off‚ÅÝ‚Äîas I suppose he will soon‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs well to keep chances open. And I can‚Äôt pick and choose now as I could when I was younger. And one must take the old if one can‚Äôt get the young.‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
